The language that is used, verbally or in text, strongly influences our thoughts and actions. Certain words or phrases can create and perpetuate biases, unwittingly or deliberately.
Biases that constrains or diminishes the worth, value, inclusiveness or potential of other human beings only serves to perpetuate disharmony, violence and a weakened society.
Leaders, whether they be politicians, CEO’s, educators, sports coaches, local community group, workplace or family leaders, have a responsibility to be aware of the language that they use when communicating to those that they lead or influence.
If we agree with the premise that the language used influences biases aligned to gender, race, sexual orientation or social class, and that such biases have a detrimental and sometimes dire impact on people’s lives and society as a whole, it would be irresponsible of us not to address the issue.
We propose that a tool or application which is able to highlight words or phrases that may perpetuate abovementioned biases and proffer bias-free, inclusive alternatives would be very beneficial in raising awareness and changing people’s linguistic habits to be less divisive.
If leaders, educators and those within the media were to realise the value and employ such a tool, then the shift to a more bias-free and inclusive language would occur in a more timely manner, leading to enormous social and economic benefits.
Benefits would include reduced racial tensions, such as the current Black Lives Matter movement, less stereotypical thinking and biases that only restrict our growth as a Nation and a Global community both economically and personally.
Black Lives Matter - We are confident that Bias Catcher could be adapted and utilised to access the Government’s Open Data to highlight information, provide understanding and recommend language that would enable the user to communicate far more effectively and engender a confidence that helps to bridge the current divide.
Bias Catcher can be adapted to a range of communication scenarios, and can help facilitate communication in a range of contexts. This can include a reduction in divisive language against different groups of people, improved harmony between different religious groups, better international communication and better cultural sensitivity.
